README.md, before:

# SCALE Medicaid Onboarding and Data Science Documentation

All Material is available on the **[Website](https://yale-medicaid.github.io/Documentation/)**.

## Contributing
If you'd like to contribute to the group's documentation you can install `mkdocs` which allows you to locally test changes before pushing and deploying the markdown and .yml files to GitHub Pages.

From the terminal can use [miniconda](https://docs.anaconda.com/miniconda/) to create a separate minimal environment named "doc_env":

```
conda create -n doc_env
```

and install the required mkdocs and mkdocs-materials here:

```
conda install -n doc_env conda-forge::mkdocs
conda install -n doc_env mkdocs-material
```

Activate this local environment:

```
conda activate doc_env
```

Navigate to the local directory where the Documentation repository is saved and deploy locally:

```
mkdocs serve
```

This will provide output indicating any warnings or issues. The last line shows where the website is locally served, which can be opened in any web browser.

```
INFO    -  [14:38:18] Serving on http://127.0.0.1:8000/
```

If the site is deploying successfully, push the changes to GitHub.

Commit message:

Prayag reorg (#17)
* I need to do python3 -m mkdocs serve

* update onboarding to clarify people to reach out to

* consistent capitalization

* small wording changes

* additional advice section

* clarify data and systems overview

* move data and systems overview to onboarding section

* add some R info to the data science practices section

* rename

* move venv to data science practices

* some small tmsis updates

* working on milgram

* section headers

* move code collaboration to data science practices section

* project tracking

* add "working in R" vignette

* partitioning

* working in R

* formatting

* update text in readme

* Move Collaborating to TMSIS

- [TODO] make a general "code collaboration" section in overall DS

---------

Co-authored-by: Anthony Lollo <anthony.lollo.jr@gmail.com>

README.md, after:

# SCALE Medicaid Onboarding and Data Science Documentation

All material is available on the **[website](https://yale-medicaid.github.io/Documentation/)**.

## Contributing
If you'd like to contribute to the group's documentation you can install `mkdocs` which allows you to locally test changes before pushing and deploying the markdown and .yml files to GitHub Pages.

From the terminal can use [miniconda](https://docs.anaconda.com/miniconda/) to create a separate minimal environment named "doc_env":

```
conda create -n doc_env
```

and install the required mkdocs and mkdocs-materials here:

```
conda install -n doc_env conda-forge::mkdocs
conda install -n doc_env mkdocs-material
```

Activate this local environment:

```
conda activate doc_env
```

Navigate to the local directory where the Documentation repository is saved and deploy locally:

```
mkdocs serve
```

If that doesn't work, try typing `python3 -m mkdocs serve`.

This will provide output indicating any warnings or issues. The last line shows where the website is locally served, which can be opened in any web browser.

```
INFO    -  [14:38:18] Serving on http://127.0.0.1:8000/
```

If the site is deploying successfully, push the changes to GitHub.
