docs/data_science/data_and_systems.md, before:

# Data and Systems

We primarily work with Administrative Medicaid Data which are stored across three separate systems depending upon the dataset and research project

#### De-identified Individual-level State Medicaid Data
We have historic extracts of administrative claims data, eligibility, and enrollment data from several states. Most of this data is old, with the Connecticut data being the most recent and the only data set we are actively refreshing. These data are stored at Yale on our window-based server.

#### National De-identified Individual-level State Medicaid Data
We have recent extracts of National Medicaid data provided by CMS (T-MSIS TAF). This dataset begins in 2016 and there is a 2-3 year lag before the files are released in their final version. Due to the size of the data they are stored on the Milgram High Performance Computing (HPC) system at Yale, which is managed by the Yale Center for Research Computing (YCRC).

#### Individual-level Connecticut Medicaid Data
Through a contract with the state of Connecticut, members of our team can obtained embedded access to Department of Social Services (DSS) systems to complete mutually agreed upon projects. After obtaining credentials, these data are accessed through an Azure Virtual Desktop (AVD) and all analyses and data remain entirely within DSS systems. Data include identifiable individual-level Administrative Medicaid claims data, enrollment, eligibility and various other program-specific data sets (e.g., Long Term Services and Supports Assessment Data).

Commit message:

Prayag reorg (#17)
* I need to do python3 -m mkdocs serve

* update onboarding to clarify people to reach out to

* consistent capitalization

* small wording changes

* additional advice section

* clarify data and systems overview

* move data and systems overview to onboarding section

* add some R info to the data science practices section

* rename

* move venv to data science practices

* some small tmsis updates

* working on milgram

* section headers

* move code collaboration to data science practices section

* project tracking

* add "working in R" vignette

* partitioning

* working in R

* formatting

* update text in readme

* Move Collaborating to TMSIS

- [TODO] make a general "code collaboration" section in overall DS

---------

Co-authored-by: Anthony Lollo <anthony.lollo.jr@gmail.com>

docs/data_science/data_and_systems.md, after:

# Data and Systems Overview

We primarily work with administrative Medicaid data across three separate systems, depending upon the dataset and research project. Navigate to the navbar section about each dataset to learn more.

#### De-identified Individual-level State Medicaid Data
We have historic extracts of administrative claims, eligibility, and enrollment data from several states. Most of this data is old, with the Connecticut data being the most recent and the only data set we are actively refreshing. These data are stored at Yale on our Windows-based server, which you will access via Microsoft Remote Desktop. _[Click here to navigate to the "State Medicaid Data" tab.](../state_data/state_medicaid_data.md)_

#### National De-identified Individual-level State Medicaid Data
We have recent extracts of national Medicaid data provided by the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services ([T-MSIS TAF](https://www.medicaid.gov/medicaid/data-systems/macbis/medicaid-chip-research-files/transformed-medicaid-statistical-information-system-t-msis-analytic-files-taf)). Our extract currently runs from 2016-2021 since there is a 2-3 year lag before the files are released in their final version. Due to the size of the data, they are stored on [Milgram](https://docs.ycrc.yale.edu/clusters/milgram/), a High Performance Computing (HPC) system at Yale managed by the Yale Center for Research Computing (YCRC). _[Click here to navigate to the "T-MSIS" tab.](../tmsis/tmsis_medicaid_data.md)_

#### Individual-level Connecticut Medicaid Data
Through a contract with the state of Connecticut, members of our team can obtained embedded access to Department of Social Services (DSS) systems to complete mutually agreed upon projects. After obtaining credentials, these data are accessed through an Azure Virtual Desktop (AVD), with all analyses and data remaining entirely within DSS systems. Data include identifiable individual-level administrative Medicaid claims, enrollment, eligibility, and various other program-specific datasets (e.g., Long Term Services and Supports Assessment). _[Click here to navigate to the "CT DSS Embedded Materials" tab.](../embedding/onboarding.md)_
