docs/tmsis/tmsis_code_collab.md, before:

# Coding Collaboration

We will use `git` to collaboratively develop analyses. The most up to date, stable, version of the libraries will be found in `/gpfs/milgram/pi/medicaid_lab/code/` on the main branch, while researcher specific development branches can be stored in your own project directory. 

> ⚠️ Code will be pushed remotely to the Yale-Medicaid organization on GitHub. Repositories **must** be initialized with .gitignore files which ignore: 
> 
> - all common data file extensions (.parquet, .xlsx, .dta, .sas7bdat)
> - files which display data for exploratory analyses (.ipynb)   

## Set up 
### Quickstart for Git on Milgram

<span style="color:#4781BE">**Generate SSH Key**</span>

This saves you from having to type your password or provide a token every time. YCRC provides a [thorough guide](https://docs.ycrc.yale.edu/clusters-at-yale/access/ssh/) on using and generating SSH keys, the main steps are outlined here. If you've already generated SSH keys (say to SSH into Milgram through the terminal) you can skip the generation steps. 

Within a terminal in Milgram type:

```
ssh-keygen
```

Press enter to save them in the devault location `/home/yourusername/.ssh/id_rsa` and create some passphrase as an extra layer of protection. The **public key**, saved in `~/.ssh/id_rsa.pub` is what we share, **NEVER SHARE THE PRIVATE KEY**, which is stored in the similarly named file *without* the `.pub` suffix. 

You can display the contents of the public key with 

```
cat ~/.ssh/id_rsa.pub 
```

which will show a very long string beginning with something like `ssh-rsa `. Copy the entire outut (including the ssh-ra part). 

<span style="color:#4781BE">**Add SSH Key to GitHub**</span>

Now you need to add that public key to your GitHub Account: [instructions are provided by GitHUb](https://docs.github.com/en/authentication/connecting-to-github-with-ssh/adding-a-new-ssh-key-to-your-github-account#adding-a-new-ssh-key-to-your-account).

1. Click on your account icon
2. Click on Settings
3. Click "SSH and GPG keys" under "Access" on left hand menu
4. Click "New SSH Key"
5. Give it some descriptive name, paste the output from `cat ~/.ssh/id_rsa.pub` into the Key box
6. Click "Add SSH Key"

Now when you clone a repository you can use the SSH remote URL.



### Existing Projects
Navigate to the repository within Yale-Medicaid on Github. Click on the green `<> Code` button in the to right and copy the SSH url to your clipboard. 

![SSH clone](../images/tmsis_ssh.png){: style="height: 345px;width: 895px;display: block; margin: 0 auto"}
    
Within Milgram use the terminal to navigate to the directory where you'd like to clone this repository. This is very likely `/home/NETID/project/`. From there type

```
git clone URL_YOU_COPIED_ABOVE
```

which should begin cloning the directory with messages like:

```
Cloning into 'QualityMetrics'...
remote: Enumerating objects: 14, done.
remote: Counting objects: 100% (14/14), done.
remote: Compressing objects: 100% (11/11), done.
remote: Total 14 (delta 3), reused 13 (delta 2), pack-reused 0 (from 0)
Receiving objects: 100% (14/14), done.
Resolving deltas: 100% (3/3), done.
```

Navigate into that directory. 

You're likely on the main branch (since you cloned from there), which you can see with `git branch`. Since you don't want to develop on the main branch create a new branch for development and switch to it. 

```
git checkout -b NEW_BRANCH_NAME
```

and you should get a message `Switched to a new branch 'NEW_BRANCH_NAME'`. Try to make the name descriptive if the branch is for a specific task, otherwise I used something general like `anthony-dev`. 

### New Projects
TODO

## Contributing  

You can check the status of your current branch with 

```
git status
```

If there are no modified files and everything is up to date you will see:

```
On branch anthony-dev
Your branch is up to date with 'origin/anthony-dev'.

nothing to commit, working tree clean
```

Otherwise, if you've been making changes, in this example creating a new file called "test_add.py", `git status` will indicate the files which have changed or added:

```
Your branch is up to date with 'origin/anthony-dev'.

Untracked files:
  (use "git add <file>..." to include in what will be committed)
	test_add.py

nothing added to commit but untracked files present (use "git add" to track)
```

Because this is a new file, we will need to add it to tracking:

```
git add test_add.py
```

And when you are ready to commit several changes you would 

```
git commit -m "some commit message"
```

Alternatively, all changes to already tracked files can be commited with 

```
git commit -am "some commit message"
```

> ⚠️ Remember to check the files being added and information being committed to ensure no sensitive information is pushed to the remote. 
> 
> - If using `-a` when committing, take the time to ensure you know exactly which files have changed as this commits `all` modifications. 
> - I recommend against using a command like `git add -A` to add new files to tracking. Better to explicitly `git add file_name` as an added layer of security. (the .gitignore is a backstop...)

Finally, committed changes can be pushed to the remote:

```
git push
```

Commit message:

Update Warnings Box
- Small Typos
- Add Warning Boxes

docs/tmsis/tmsis_code_collab.md, after:

# Coding Collaboration

We will use `git` to collaboratively develop analyses. The most up to date, stable, version of the libraries will be found in `/gpfs/milgram/pi/medicaid_lab/code/` on the main branch, while researcher specific development branches can be stored in your own project directory. 


!!! warning "Always include a .gitignore"

	Code will be pushed remotely to the Yale-Medicaid organization on GitHub. Repositories **must** be initialized with .gitignore files which ignores:
	
	- all common data file extensions (.parquet, .xlsx, .dta, .sas7bdat)
	- files which display data for exploratory analyses (.ipynb)  

## Set up 

### Quickstart for Git on Milgram

<span style="color:#4781BE">**Generating SSH Key**</span>

This saves you from having to type your password or provide a token every time. YCRC provides a [thorough guide](https://docs.ycrc.yale.edu/clusters-at-yale/access/ssh/) on using and generating SSH keys, the main steps are outlined here. If you've already generated SSH keys (say to SSH into Milgram through the terminal) you can skip the generation steps. 

Within a terminal in Milgram type:

```
ssh-keygen
```

Press enter to save them in the devault location `/home/yourusername/.ssh/id_rsa` and create some passphrase as an extra layer of protection. The **public key**, saved in `~/.ssh/id_rsa.pub` is what we share, **NEVER SHARE THE PRIVATE KEY**, which is stored in the similarly named file *without* the `.pub` suffix. 

You can display the contents of the public key with 

```
cat ~/.ssh/id_rsa.pub 
```

which will show a very long string beginning with something like `ssh-rsa `. Copy the entire outut (including the ssh-ra part). 

<span style="color:#4781BE">**Add SSH Key to GitHub**</span>

Now you need to add that public key to your GitHub Account: [instructions are provided by GitHUb](https://docs.github.com/en/authentication/connecting-to-github-with-ssh/adding-a-new-ssh-key-to-your-github-account#adding-a-new-ssh-key-to-your-account).

1. Click on your account icon
2. Click on Settings
3. Click "SSH and GPG keys" under "Access" on left hand menu
4. Click "New SSH Key"
5. Give it some descriptive name, paste the output from `cat ~/.ssh/id_rsa.pub` into the Key box
6. Click "Add SSH Key"

Now when you clone a repository you can use the SSH remote URL.

---

### Existing Projects
Navigate to the repository within Yale-Medicaid on Github. Click on the green `<> Code` button in the to right and copy the SSH url to your clipboard. 

![SSH clone](../images/tmsis_ssh.png){: style="height: 345px;width: 895px;display: block; margin: 0 auto"}
    
Within Milgram use the terminal to navigate to the directory where you'd like to clone this repository. This is very likely `/home/NETID/project/`. From there type

```
git clone URL_YOU_COPIED_ABOVE
```

which should begin cloning the directory with messages like:

```
Cloning into 'QualityMetrics'...
remote: Enumerating objects: 14, done.
remote: Counting objects: 100% (14/14), done.
remote: Compressing objects: 100% (11/11), done.
remote: Total 14 (delta 3), reused 13 (delta 2), pack-reused 0 (from 0)
Receiving objects: 100% (14/14), done.
Resolving deltas: 100% (3/3), done.
```

Navigate into that directory. 

You're likely on the main branch (since you cloned from there), which you can see with `git branch`. Since you don't want to develop on the main branch create a new branch for development and switch to it. 

```
git checkout -b NEW_BRANCH_NAME
```

and you should get a message `Switched to a new branch 'NEW_BRANCH_NAME'`. Try to make the name descriptive if the branch is for a specific task, otherwise I used something general like `anthony-dev`. 

---

### New Projects
TODO

## Contributing  

You can check the status of your current branch with 

```
git status
```

If there are no modified files and everything is up to date you will see:

```
On branch anthony-dev
Your branch is up to date with 'origin/anthony-dev'.

nothing to commit, working tree clean
```

Otherwise, if you've been making changes, in this example creating a new file called "test_add.py", `git status` will indicate the files which have changed or added:

```
Your branch is up to date with 'origin/anthony-dev'.

Untracked files:
  (use "git add <file>..." to include in what will be committed)
	test_add.py

nothing added to commit but untracked files present (use "git add" to track)
```

Because this is a new file, we will need to add it to tracking:

```
git add test_add.py
```

And when you are ready to commit several changes you would 

```
git commit -m "some commit message"
```

Alternatively, all changes to already tracked files can be commited with 

```
git commit -am "some commit message"
```

!!! warning "Check before you commit"

	Remember to check the files being added and information being committed to ensure no sensitive information is pushed to the remote. 
	
	  - If using `-a` when committing, take the time to ensure you know exactly which files have changed as this commits `all` modifications. 
	  - I recommend against using a command like `git add -A` to add new files to tracking. Better to explicitly `git add file_name` as an added layer of security. (the .gitignore is a backstop...)

Finally, committed changes can be pushed to the remote:

```
git push
```
